in the last two sessions we've talked
about how many servings of nutrient-rich
foods people need to eat each day from
the different food groups by choosing
colorful fruits and vegetables whole
grains and low-fat dairy and protein
sources we can provide healthy diets for
the people we support we also talked
about limiting the amount of nutrient
poor foods served to individuals by
avoiding processed foods with added fat
sugar and sodium but some of the
individuals we support are on special
diets that require us to have more
specific information about a food the
Nutrition Facts label and ingredient
list found on food packages can be
helpful let's look more closely at the
Nutrition Facts label as we just said
the Nutrition Facts label can be found
on packaged food and each label gives
basic information in the same way this
allows us to compare one food product to
another using the same type of
information notice that there's a lot of
information on the label what does it
all mean and how do we use it let's
break it down into sections to make it
easier to understand the serving size is
a standard amount of food given in
measurements that are familiar to us
such as cups tablespoons or pieces the
serving size lets you know how many
nutrients you're getting out of a
specific amount of food this doesn't
mean that you need to eat the amount
given in the serving size it just means
that the nutrients listed are based on a
specific amount of food the servings per
container tell us how many servings are
in a particular package different size
food containers have a different number
of servings per container this
information is important to know because
all of the rest of the information on
the label applies to just one serving
not the whole package for example if an
individual you support it's two servings
of a food instead of just one then they
will get twice the amount of nutrients
section two contains calorie information
calories are a measure of the amount of
energy we get from food eating too many
calories and
not using enough through physical
activity can cause weight gain an easy
way to use the calories information is
if a food has under 40 calories it's low
and it's high if it has over 400
calories from fat just shows how many of
the calories in the food come from fat
section 3 tells us which nutrients to
avoid or limit this is the section where
we find the amount of total fat
saturated fat trans fats cholesterol and
sodium eating too much of these
nutrients isn't healthy and can lead to
heart disease cancer and high blood
pressure we want to limit these
nutrients as much as we can we'll be
discussing each of these in detail in
the next session let's move on to
discuss the nutrients we should eat more
of there in section 4 most Americans
don't eat enough of these nutrients even
though they're important in a healthy
diet fiber found in food can help
prevent constipation vitamin A is
important for healthy eyes and vitamin C
prevents cell damage all three of these
nutrients can be found in fruits and
vegetables calcium is important for
healthy bones and can be found in dairy
products iron can be found in dry beans
peas and legumes as well as meat and can
help blood carry more oxygen throughout
our bodies you can get plenty of these
nutrients by eating nutrient-rich foods
without having to take additional
supplements section 5 shows that the
percent daily value which we will talk
about next is based on a 2,000 calorie
diet this section is not critical to
understand but it does show what the
percent daily value is based on the
percent daily value is a guide that
makes it easier to see how nutrients in
a serving of food contribute to the
total daily diet don't get caught up in
the percentages the important thing to
remember is that 20 percent or more is
high so a 20 percent or higher daily
value for the desired nutrients is good
those are shown in blue on the label we
also want to keep the nutrient
we need to limit to a value of five
percent or lower those nutrients are
yellow on the label you may have noticed
that some of the nutrients listed don't
give a percent daily value trans fat is
one example since there is no safe level
of trans fats we want to eat as close to
zero grams as possible
neither proteins nor sugar have a
percent daily value listed either
unlike trans fats however this doesn't
mean that we don't want to eat any
protein or sugar a percent daily value
has not been set for them because most
people in the United States get enough
protein and sugar through food let's
turn our attention to total
carbohydrates sugars plus the fiber
found in food make up total
carbohydrates as you can see there is a
percent daily value for total
carbohydrates knowing the number of
grams of total carbohydrates is useful
when planning a diabetic diet if you
have an individual who is on a diabetic
diet talk to a dietician nurse or other
health care professional if you have
questions or need more training on this
diet we will not be discussing it
further here another helpful piece of
information is the ingredient list
ingredients are the different things
that go into making up another food some
foods like fruits and vegetables don't
need an ingredient label if they stay as
a whole piece for example this orange
doesn't have an ingredient list because
it is just an orange but if we turn it
into juice the carton has to have an
ingredient list other foods are made up
of many different ingredients the
ingredient list is found on packaged
foods food companies are required to
list ingredients in the order from the
largest amount to the least amount in
this bread example whole-wheat flour is
the first ingredient listed so we know
that this bread is made up mostly of
whole-wheat flour wheat bran is the
ingredient listed last so we know that
it is the ingredient in the smallest
amount the best food choices have simple
short in
gradiant lists made up of whole foods
with sugar fat or sodium being in the
smallest amounts stay away from foods
that have a long ingredient list with
names that sound like something you
would find in a chemistry lab these
foods are heavily processed and are
usually nutrient poor we will see more
examples of this in the next module the
Nutrition Facts label can be challenging
to understand but just remember eating a
regular healthy diet doesn't have to be
hard eat plenty of colorful fruits and
vegetables whole grains and low-fat
protein and dairy choices and avoid
processed foods with added fat sugar and
sodium the Nutrition Facts label and the
ingredient list are available on the
package if you want to know more about a
specific food